Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined for a second time by Doctor
Charlotte Bliss. And today, we're going to talk about
her latest book, Doctor Bot, Why Doctors Can Fail
Us and how AI Could Save Life. So, Charlotte,
welcome back to the show. It's always a pleasure
to to everyone.
It's great to be here, Ricardo. Delighted to be
here talking about the book.
So in regards to how and why doctors can
fail us, what are medical errors or, or what
is medical error and how many people are affected
by it?
Yeah, medical error is, it's estimated in one study
in the states to be the 3rd leading cause
of death after heart disease and cancer. So it's
responsible for the deaths, certainly in the states where
much of the research into these kinds of problems
has has taken place. It it affects the lives
it kills by a quarter of a million people
annually. Um, SO the way I I opened the
book, I say that every few days, the equivalent
of an Airbus for Airbuses carrying 170 passengers crashes
on the ground, but it doesn't make the 24
hour news cycle. Um, AND but it's happening and
it's happening on American soil. This is the equivalent
of this happening on American soil when it comes
to medical error. So, um, yeah, it's a big
problem.
Mhm. But and what causes it? I mean, what
are the causes behind medical error?
Yeah, so there's a variety of different things. Misdiagnosis
is a big one. A diagnostic error affects. Again,
the estimates here are varied, but it's on sort
of charitable estimates affects about 1 in 20 visits
to the doctor. But some researchers working in this
area say it's probably could be as much as
20% of visits. So in 5 to 20%. Um
AND autopsy reports bear out the sort of the
higher figure. Um. It it also is things like
medication errors, handoff problems, communication breakdowns are a big
challenge in medicine. Uh THAT that's particularly involves uh
younger doctors as well, junior doctors, uh, where they
may not be as familiar with processes. So the
systems in which which doctors work can also affect
and and the pressures that are on them within
those systems can certainly affect uh the likelihood of
of some kinds of communication breakdowns and so on
too, but I don't think that they So it's
not entirely the full story. So we are our
cognition obviously is affected by the environment in which
we work in, but I want to say there's
an upper limit to what we can do with
with the systems as they currently are, and how
that could improve things like diagnostic error rates.
Mhm. Yes, we're going to talk a little bit
more about that, but uh does the medical system
affect doctors themselves and would that be one of
the reasons why doctors make errors?
Absolutely. It's a it's a huge issue. And um
To some extent it's kind of taboo as well
within medicine, so doctors are really burnt out. The
studies show that in, for example, the US and
the UK about 50% of doctors are burnt out
during COVID, that figure was even higher, it was
quite staggering. Um, MENTAL health problems are an issue.
So burn out sort of is related to that.
You've got fatigue, uh, sort of withdrawal from, uh,
uh, doing your job but your your top capacity,
but also a feeling of dissatisfaction with the work.
Um, THIS drives errors. So for example, one study
found Uh doctors are depressed, about 20% of doctors
in the state are report being depressed. Um, AND
that leads to around depression and self can cause
error. So one study finds a sixfold increase in
medication errors. Um. And you know, when it comes
to suicide, about 300 to 400 doctors every year
in the states take their own lives. A very
recent that's equivalent of one medical school graduating class
in a colleague of mine in Karolinska, Emma Brulin
one study. Very recently published in Sweden that found
there was a treble trebling of the rate of
suicide among psychiatrists. So there are mental health professions
that burn out as well compared to the population.
So, um, mental health issues, feelings of burnout fatigue,
uh, working long hours, very, very good reasons why
doctors are exhausted by their job.
In the book at a certain point you talk
about how doctors often resist inputs from outsiders. I
mean, why is that important and in what ways
do you think those inputs could improve medical practice?
Yeah, um. I think they do, and it's interesting
because medicine is a very hierarchical institution and field
in a way. Um, AND in some ways that's
part of the education of a doctor. Um, BECAUSE
it's almost an apprenticeship, you learn from the people
higher up. So there's very and in some respects,
traditional medicine or medicine as we know it, that's
that's important for how you learn. Some of it
is copying, some of it's learning on the job,
the processes and all the rest of it. So
it does tend to be quite a hierarchical field
and that psychology of status is somewhat problematic within
it. But for us as patients, as well as
for people who are lower in the pecking order.
But I think that's part of the reason why
domain experts in other fields tend to be a
bit Excluded. So what you sometimes find in medical
school, it's quite often you find in medical schools,
and I've been hanging around medical schools for for
over a decade now, working within them, but some
of the sociology or their ethics or psychology that's
to be taught, it's very often taught by a
doctor, a medical doctor who has taken an interest
in those fields rather than sort of domain experts
across faculty coming in to teach but um. So
that's a generality, but so even among those who
say medicine is an information processing field, and there's
some leading medical doctors who are advocates of information
processing as if they don't really delve into what
that actually means, which is interesting too, which is
something I tried to cover a bit. But it's
important because when you exclude other experts, you have
a very narrow lens in which to understand the
medical profession. And that I think has been a
problem. So if you look at medical memoirs, medical
books, memos and exception here, but they're mostly an
assumption that only a doctor. Who who has practiced
medicine has the real expertise to write about it,
which is a bit again, it's overly narrow because
we know sociology, psychology is relevant here, philosophy is
relevant. Cognitive science is incredibly important in thinking about
what it is the doctor do. So I feel
that very often that gets omitted and we're left
with a very there's a lot of blind spots
and how to think about medical thinking. If it's
only left to doctors and sometimes a kind of
polyannaish response about how we improve medicine as in
maybe they just need a bit doctors just need
a bit more education. If you look at some
of the educational. SOLUTIONS. I mean, I say it's
a bit like homely chicken soup for, you know,
conquers it's, you know, it's comforting, but it's not
really going to do very much. And that's been
a kind of a light motif throughout the history
of medicine, I would say to which you can
get into a little bit if you like.
Mhm. Sure. Uh, SO tell us a little bit
about the work you've done on, uh, sharing access
to patients' health records. Why is that important and
why is it sometimes so hard to access?
Yeah, so access to one's health records online, a
bit like online banking, you know, you get access
to your own information in real time and and
all the rest of it. Um, THIS is quite
a recent innovation, um, but around 30 countries worldwide
patients have at least some access to their online
record um. America has the most robustly transparent. The
United States is the most robustly transparent access. But
what you find is there's been huge resistance wherever
this is being proposed, and the medical profession gets
very anxious about doctors about patients are poking their
noses into their own records, um, which I think
is an interesting thing in itself. Because it sort
of is somewhat reflective of the sociologists talk about
the power dynamics in medicine, and they very rarely
explain where this why doctors want the power, where
it comes from. That's a different story, but um
so there is definitely this sort of. SUBORDINATION of
the patient who after all has the greatest vested
interest in accessing their own health information. And what's
fascinating and I've done a lot of research in
this with my colleagues, both at open notes in
Beth Israel Deaconess and also in Uppsala University, but
in Sweden, but patients derive wherever studies have been
conducted, they derive a lot of benefit. Because they
better remember what doctors said, they can look up
medications, and they remember to follow up with test
results. So there's a lot of benefits to the
patient, but again, and I think somewhat for good
reasons, when I say this, doctors are a bit
resistant because, well, they express the fear that there's
going to be more contact time from patients and
very mixed findings of mostly patients. DON'T like to
burden their doctors. Um, BUT those are the kinds
of things that could be managed. So um it's
reflective, I think of this this differential the status
differential in medicine and the idea. I mean, the
British Medical Association threatened to sue a couple of
years ago, NHS England for opening the records didn't
come to anything but enormous fear and resistance.
Mhm. Do you think that doctors are essential in
providing care to patients?
Um, SO that's a great question. It's a provocative
question. I, I think that yes, currently they are
essential, but I suppose what the perspective that I
take it would go back to this idea. If
you look at the trajectory of technology, and I
come back to this idea of Amara's law, Roy
Amara was an American futurologist who said people tend
to overestimate what technology can do in the short
term, but underestimate what it can do in the
long term. Um, AND, uh, uh, business analysts and
again, other tech forecasters like um Christiansen, the late
Clayton Christensen, but also Richard and Daniels have written
about the future of the professions. I'm very sympathetic
to their perspective, which is we are increasingly going
to see a dismantling of tasks that are performed
by white collar professionals that will be taken over.
uh BY technology, somewhat in part, but then more
than likely, largely taken over in the future. I
don't think we're we're there yet at all, but
we do see this incursion, which I don't think
is going to go away. Um, SO in the
longer term, I wouldn't wouldn't put forecasts on it,
but I do think it predicts hard, hard timelines
on it, but, but certainly I don't think doctors,
as we know them will will always be. Uh,
NECESSARY, which may be very creepy to a lot
of people who are watching or listening.
Yeah, so before we get into AI and how
it can contribute to the health care system, let
me just ask you a few questions about some
of the issues that people might have or even
frequently have when trying to access medicine and some
of the issues they have to deal with also.
When uh dealing with doctors directly. So, is medicine
generally economically accessible to most people?
The short answer is no. TAKE a system like
the US and it's in some respects an outlier
when it comes to rich countries, but let's even
take a sort of principle of charity. Look at
look at wealthier countries where people generally have more
access to doctors. There are more doctors. In the
US, 60% of bankruptcies are caused by medical costs,
so there are massive challenges in paying for health
coverage, but generally worldwide about 100 million people annually
are propelled into poverty because of the cost of
their healthcare. Um, BUT even if you look at
the the the the EU where most patients have
access to at least some services, still around the
festive spending comes from patients' pockets, and that affects
obviously poor patients more who have in the EU
5 times more likely to have unmet health needs.
Now, even if you have sort of free at
the point of access care at the bricks and
mortar hospital, and this is where medicine tends to
focus on what happens when you actually enter the
doctor's office. But before that, there are costs involved
in getting to the doctor's office. Transportation costs are
huge for patients. If you rely on public transport,
you're more likely to miss your visit or to
to delay going to the doctor. If you work
in a gig gig economy job or you have
parental duties, uh, or if you're you're a woman,
you're you're more likely to forgo appointments as well.
People with disabilities, the elderly, the actual physical challenge
of getting to the doctor is huge. So these
challenges are often referred to as the inverse care
law. It's recognized that people with the greater greatest
need are less likely to have access to healthcare.
Uh, COSTS are huge, um, but also if you
like physical barriers are massive challenges as well. Uh,
PEOPLE with disabilities, if I mention them, they often
tend to get overlooked in all of. But wherever
you see studies, they've got their twice as likely
to uh again for go seeing the doctor, because
there's a lot of challenges and actually transporting yourself
into the doctor's office.
Apart from economic factors, what would you say are
the other main barriers that people encounter in accessing
medicine?
So what I've said, I think transportation is a
big one, taking the time out of your day,
which is highly disruptive, um. Um, SO in American
time use survey finds that for a 20 minute
visit, patients take an average of 2 hours out
of their day, to make the visit, that's higher
if you're on a low income or you're unemployed
because you're you're likely to have greater travel concerns
um and it's more disruptive to your day. Um.
Those sorts of issues again, the issues with disability,
elderly patients in the states again, legacy structures, the
effects of redlining and you know, laws that are
that are not that we don't have to sort
of create our next too far back in history
that there was segregation and that's had a geographical
effect on access. So, uh, primary care shortage areas
areas tend to be uh they're 70% higher and
predominantly black neighborhoods. So you have access buyers that
can affect people for a variety of reasons. And
then of course, not every the contingencies of history,
not every city on earth. I mean, I lived
in Boston, it's an epicenter for medicine. Uh, I'm
from Belfast. It isn't, um, you know, so historical
happenstance means not everybody actually has resources close to
them.
And when dealing with doctors themselves, what is symptom
denial?
So patients can sometimes patients delay seeking health seeking
because they literally aren't quite sure what's wrong. There's
this sort of conundrum where you have to decide,
you as a patient are your first triage system.
So you have to decide when your own symptoms
reach a threshold. It's worthy of visiting the doctor
in a sense. Um, EVEN though you lack that
expertise, you've got to work it out. That's incidentally
why many the internet as a resource, we get
into sort of generative AI technologies to those sorts
of tools, but they are useful to the extent
they can of course they have limitations as well,
but they can facilitate. Um, UNDERSTANDING. So symptom denial
can arise as well. So there's this general uh
challenge of knowing when your symptoms are right, but
symptom denial can also arise in front of doctors.
So, um, Uh, patients tend, and again this comes
back to the psychology of status in the visit,
where it's built in because you are sitting at
the feet of an expert as a patient. That's
the reason why you visit the doctor, you want
to find out more. Um, BUT patients tend to
see a face in those situations. Irving Goffman. The
Canadian sociologists talk about presentation of self in everyday
life and psychologists talk about social desirability biases and
all the rest, but the idea that you tend
to present yourself in a different way, particularly next
to somebody who is comparatively higher status, meaning you're
more likely to to uh Uh, studies in the
states show about 85% of patients have lied or
concealed clinically relevant information to a doctor, mostly about
socially stigmatized conditions, mental health conditions, people delay health
seeing, got lots of studies on that, but also
embarrass. RED flag cancer symptoms as well. People may
delay because they're afraid the doctor bother this currently
comes up. They're afraid of being judged and they
have a fear of embarrassment. So those are the
kinds of psychological pitfalls that can interfere with the
visit and amount to a kind of denial and
vernacular kind of language.
And and which are better interviewers, doctors or computers,
I mean, do we know that?
So, if you break, I'll say short answer, doctors,
but if you break the task down, Patients disclose
more to um not to they don't disclose as
much to doctors. So even though a doctor is
still probably the best we have now at having
the dialogue to gather medical information and to to
celebrate the task of diagnosis, but that's different from
actually disclosing, divulging your problems, in which case uh
computers and even pen and paper and just questionnaires
are a better resource for doing. And we have
decades of research on this. Um, AGAIN, the reasons
why go back to the what we've just discussed
this as psychology of status and and patients feeling
a bit subordinate. They don't like to, um, Uh,
divulge certain symptoms, they're embarrassed, but also in the
medical visit, doctors do tend to dominate the dialogue.
Again, lots of, of social science research on that.
They interrupt. Um, THEY, they interrupt and they end
up taking the floor, so to speak, which interferes
with information gathering. So patients literally pour their hearts
out literally it's not the right word, figuratively pour
their hearts out to machines and um that again
that goes back to the 1960s with Joseph Weizenbaum,
Warner slack another doctor. VERY same year, 1966, they
both recognize it published in the same as a
great minds think alike kind of scenario and they
recognized even when you put patients in front of
these sort of monster sized computers, they could see
them slagging off the computer uninhibited, saying, you know,
all kinds of things that they would never say
in front of a doctor in a white coat.
When it comes to diagnosis, what should we consider
when it comes to how doctors learn to diagnose
and their human limitations?
Lots to think about here. So, um, again, I
come back to the idea that doctors are only
human. Um, AND that's in some ways is the
premise of the book. You know, let's take seriously
the fact doctors aren't gods. Um, SO there's limitations
with keeping up to date. Um, WITH biomedical knowledge,
and what doctors are expected to do is, is,
is just, it's colossal actually. I made a calculation
a couple of years ago using PubMed, and a
biomedical article is published every 39 seconds. Um, AND
if doctors were to read only 2% of the
relevant material there, they'd be spending 22.5 hours per
day, and that's not even committing it to memory
and making it sort of practically useful information, which
is what you need for expertise. So you can
see the massive challenges there and kind of this
information treadmill. Um, BEYOND that, um, there are challenges
with noise in medicine. Daniel Conneman has written about
this is something I also focus on. There's a
whole variety of noise that arises. There's slight gender
differences in male and female doctors and how they
practice with some fascinating ties to a slight incremental
uh greater likelihood that female doctors practice evidence based
medicine they're more likely to, which is interesting. But
the other side, you've got huge variety in terms
of say junior doctors on the one hand learning
new things, uh, getting into the comfort zone of
practicing medicine fluently, so to speak, and then you've
got cognitive decline, which kicks in on our 40
and 48 do really like to acknowledge this, but
you know, you've got a cognitive decline kicking in,
which makes it even more but that's kind of
taboo actually. A greater challenge of keeping up to
date. Um, AND, uh, you know, it's, it's very
little wonder doctors practice evidence-based medicine only around half
the time. We've got lots of studies to show.
That's the case. Um, SO the diagnostic challenges here
are enormous and even aside from the noise, you
have the challenge of medicine itself is sort of
an exercise in stereotyping, because it's just Robert McAuley
would talk about practice naturalness, uh, a bit like.
OF learned common system one, you learn to recognize
patterns when it comes to symptoms and diseases, but
the real challenge here is sometimes unwanted biases can
kick in. How do you avoid those when you
lack conscious access to to what how you're making
the decision. Um, SO there, there are huge challenges
and I mean the way I frame it is
it's amazing doctors get it right as often as
they do.
Yeah. How about AI? I mean, how developed this
AI in terms of being able to diagnose diseases
at this point in time and do you think
that it can overcome uh doctor's limitations when it
comes to diagnosis?
Really big question. So it depends on the AI
tools, um, and it depends on how it is
integrated into care as well. Um, SO, What we
know is, so take sort of AI 2.0, which
is machine learning, which is great at working out
patterns, it can crunch through, you know, vast volumes
of data to pick up, to discern patterns that
we're not able to see. And that is an
amazing tool. It's important in radiology. It can be
very where it can uh it can be diag
diagnostically more consistent and eliminate some of the noise
and be more accurate. Um, BUT it's also that
kind of uh of AI is also useful, for
example, in electronic health records, sifting through and making
prognostic predictions. Uh, AGAIN, coming back to to uh
very interesting studies by by a team at Harvard
Medical School, which found that from. HEALTH records, you
can discern patients with, for example, victims of domestic
violence or patients who are likely to take their
own lives. And the studies show we're talking about,
you know, from 10 to 30 months in advance
for about 40% of patients of doctors who is
the flip of a coin, they can't tell very
often what's going to happen. So that kind of
prediction is highly significant and could be incredibly important
for doctors. Then you've got the kind of uh
But the question is, are those tools useful? Well,
it depends on how they're trained and are they
valid for other populations. You've got a whole set
of other concerns there. Then you have issues with
uh you have the generative AI tools which are
sort of AI 3.0 as we currently have, which
are able to again use vast amounts of large
language models these are of information that they that
they can generate responses to. So we've all Anyone
who's used tools like chat GPT or or Google's
Gemini, that's a bit like talking to the internet
on steroids. But again, these are very good at
associative patterns, but they don't do counterfactual reasoning or
or they don't have strengths and causality, but that
they still can be very useful tools for picking
out associations. And again, you've got fascinating and and
you'd be cheerless not to to be impressed by
a lot of these studies, which you give some
examples, but um again, I would say the limitations
here would be, again, we don't yet have all
the evidence that they're superior to doctors, but they
they they can be highly impressive and you've got
challenges here with how these tools are trained. The
how they hallucinate that is they make they make
mistakes, which can be very compelling and confident, very
confident. Um, THEY also can be succumbed to biases.
They can replicate human biases, they can be obsequious
sort of people. PLEASING in their own way and
their responses. And so there are a whole host
of challenges with those tools as well. And the
real issue there, I think Ricardo in the long
term is going to be, is it, is it
better or worse because you're not going to have
the perfect technology and we just don't know yet.
We just don't have the research, but I would
sort of pause here and say the technology is
the worst it's ever going to be, so it
would be a mistake only to focus on current
technologies and say that that's sort of the end
of the line here, you know, AI 75 years
old, you know, your competition in the future is
not going to look like if you're a doctor,
but it currently doesn't, so that's um yeah.
And how about treatment? What would you say are
some of the biggest issues with human doctors doing
it?
Um, SO, Lots of ways to interpret this. We
could be thinking about robotics. Uh, WE could be
thinking about treatment in terms, not something I get
into into in the book is robotics. I sort
of think more about the primary care visit but
treatment could be in terms of um treatment suggestions
or prescribing or giving information to patients about what
about their condition. And you've also got the issue
of treatment is sort of bedside manner as well,
which you think you can get into you think
about them differently and I think it when it
comes to each of those, there is, there are
challenges for for doctors to get it right. By
the way, these are humans who are multitasking, multitasking
is, you know, people don't multitask, the task switch.
So the toggle between tasks and the more tasks
they have to do, the more likely they are
to make mistakes. So lots of issues there were
AI could come in and supplement or take over
certain tasks. And if we if we take the
example of um communicating the patients, treatment suggestions or
recommendations. Look at the vehicle of the online record
that we talked about earlier, um. It seems and
I've done some research and it seems that doctors
are using generative AI tools to help them with
documentation, more than likely for communicating with patients. So
I would say already there's an uptake in using
these sorts of tools for treatment as a sort
of as communication.
Mhm. Uh, SO we talked about the limitations of
doctors, but, uh, and we, you also mentioned some
of the current limitations of AI tools, but, uh,
can AI also be biased? And if so, why
should we worry about that?
AI can certainly be biased, and if we go
back to Cathy O'Neill weapons of mass destruction 2016,
her book, she sort of launched that into the
conversation where there was a tendency to think algorithms
are neutral and there's still a sort of human.
TENDENCY to think that they they are more neutral
than than humans, but certainly they can be biased.
And in some sense, machine learning is a misnomer
because humans can decide what they feed these machines,
what they're trained on, and They can be it's
the old slogan garbage in garbage out. So they
can perpetuate if there's omissions and biases within information
fed to these to whatever AI and machine learning
tools, generative AI tools, they can still be. PERPETUATED.
I give an example. Um, ONE study found that
AI or health data that is used to train
AI, but 50% of it comes from America, United
States of America and China. Now that raises really
grave issues about global representation. Similarly, generative AI tools
are trained on open source on internet sources and
all the rest 50% of the internet's in English.
Fewer than 1 in 5 people speaks English where
you've got a challenge there with the accuracy of
these tools for marginalized languages. There's evidence that they're
getting better for many languages Italian, Spanish is good.
Uh, AS English for one study found for for
medical responses. Uh, BUT, um, with all the limitations
still, but for many languages, it's they're still not
going to be there. So that's an example of
the ways and we also know that these tools.
AND perpetuate some of the diagnostic uh biases that
exist and may even worsen them in some cases,
some cases, some studies show worsen them. Some say
that they're better and the fewer biases. It depends.
So it's very hard to answer in the round,
but certainly they can um they're susceptible to bias.
Mhm. So, uh,
what role
would you say technology and specifically AI can play
in medicine?
I think it can play a it will play
and it is already currently playing a role in
in medicine. Um, I give some examples because AI
tools have already, I mean, since the 1980s, there's
been clinical decision support tools with expert AI's in
the form of advice about um um. ALERTS about
medications, for example, or um algorithmic support, you know
that in the electronic health record that will say
please ask this patient these questions about whatever their
high risk for. But what tends to happen with
those sorts of supports was they're just not well
integrated into the workflow. So doctors tended to, they
have very little evidence that these to actually improve
patient outcomes because they tend to get overridden. DOCTORS
are susceptible to alert fatigue as it's called. Um,
BUT other tools are already being deployed in healthcare.
I mean, I've just done a hold off the
presses for you, Ricardo, we got survey data back
on a UK study on what's called ambient AI.
Now this is a form of AI that also
uses large language models, but it listens to the
medical visit. And it populates the conversation with into
the electronic health record to make the administrative task
of the doctor easier. So that they can actually
just talk to the patient. What we find, we
asked a UK GPs, you know, are you using
it to 14% said that they were just 1
in 7. Um, BUT there's mixed findings there about
the error rate, how good these tools are for
different kinds of patients. On the whole, they tended
to think that the tools and very small sample
size the tools are better for than their own
note taking, but they need oversight. You can't, you
know, there's errors there, the notes can so called
hallucinate, the AI can hallucinate and For patients who
don't speak English as their first language, there's still
challenges. Um, SO AI is already within the visit
increasingly so we can get into generative AI did
survey research on this. I think I mentioned the
other. Um, PODCAST we did, but we found 2024,
1 in 5 doctors said they were using commercial
genitive AI tools of UK doctors. This year it
went up to 1 in 4 January we did
the we did the survey. EXACT same survey, January
25 quarter of doctors said they were using AI
tools like CBT for clinical tasks. So it's already
here, whether they're using them effectively is a whole
different concern, but it's it's in the visit.
And do we know if they're using it effectively?
Um, So we here we get to the issue
of uh this is this is the key issue
actually, and again I overly problem with the book,
but I do have a chapter on this this
idea of man and machine working together and this
is sort of the last mile problem as it's
been called and actually it's very what what we
do tend to see is that uh. So people
tend to anthropomorphize, especially this later generation of AI
because as they say, they feel like they're talking
to another human, so to speak, and they because
there's a back and forth, there's a dialogic nature
of these tools, but there is a tendency among
domain experts to be more likely to hold their
nose to algorithmic output. And this goes back to
the work of Paul Mill in the 50s. Berkeley
De Forest in University of Chicago, you've got people
like Jennifer Logg at Georgetown, they've worked on, but
again this tends to be siloed and not much
taken up with them in medical fields, but There
is a tendency for experts to be more averse
to algorithmic output, um, but the lay lay population
tends to be in a particular domain, tends to
be more deferential, more trusting, so that's called the
algorithmic appreciation versus algorithmic aversion. But we do I'm
seeing interesting studies where um there is where. Doctors
are deferring sometimes, perhaps they are too trusting. So
the issue here it's a really challenging one Carlo
because do doctors sometimes overly trust or overly distrust
and what we do see in some studies by
Adam Rodman and Ethan. OTHERS is if you actually
compare doctors working on with genitive AI tools or
with other just internet tools versus the the generative
AI on its own, like chat CPT or OpenAIO
one or whatever, you do tend to still see
that the In some studies that the doctors are
hurting the accuracy of the AI and the AI
is is quite significantly better. So that would suggest
there is this continuation of a kind of algorithmic
aversion, which which invites very interesting questions about what's
the right configuration of expertise to work with AI
and or indeed when humans should be in the
loop and high. What, you know, do we need
a medical professional at all, what does that mean?
What, what is the training involved in order to
be astute and critical, but also judicious. So it's
not a very easy question to answer.
OK, so I have one last question then. How
do you look at the future of the sort
of partnership between doctors and AI in providing healthcare?
And do you think there's uh any version of
the future where doctors would simply be replaced by
AI?
Um, I, I, I think that so that you're
asking me to put my head above the parapet
here very much, but look, I think in the
future it will that's the direction of travel, but
I don't think we're near it yet. Um, I
think there's going to be a period of flux
where we see, and we already see it's very
hard to integrate these tools within workflow. It's very
difficult for doctors to change their um. Uh, WORK
habits because their day is so packed and busy
and frenetic, so changing how you do things is
challenging, um. But I do foresee that AI will
take over some tasks, surveys I've conducted, doctors always
think it's going to come for the task they
least like, the administrative task, the documentation, they're divided
about whether it will happen for diagnostics and prognostics,
but the thing they least think it will come
for is empathy. My answer to that is I
don't think any doctor goes through 10 years of
medical education to become a patient empathizer. So I
think clinging to that is a particular, you know,
will always be needed with or without AI because
we empathize other people can empathize, we can deploy
other people in the duty of care of patients
and to facilitate that. So I guess it's it's
um I think it will happen. I think that
there will be increasing disintermediation or taking over technological
task, but it's going to be much slower than
people imagine. And there's wider societal questions that we
need to ask about that as well. Privacy is
huge issues with the disruption of of healthcare as
we know it.
Great. So the book is again Doctor Bo Why
Doctors Can Fail Us and how AI could Save
Lives. Uh, OF course, leaving a link to the
book in the description down below and uh Charlotte,
just before we go, where can people find you
and your work on the internet?
So you'll find me on uh scholar, Google Scholar,
you'll find me on, I have my own website
that I, I curate where I put all my,
my articles and Uppsala University website as well. And
I'm on I'm on Twitter and Blue Sky and
LinkedIn.
Yeah, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come to come on the show
again. It's always a pleasure to talk with you.
It's great to be here. Thank you very much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor, Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.